# Safely Following Symbolic Links

Many tools that scan directory trees offer an option to follow symbolic links,
but with the caveat that the tool may get stuck in infinite recursion should a
link loop back on itself.

This tool walks directory trees while detecting and preventing symlink
recursion.

It can also be run in a simpler mode to resolve a single path or list only the
immediate members of a directory.

## Package Requirements

Python 3.10 or later.

The package has no dependencies beyond the Python Standard Library.

## `symlinkwalk.py` Executable Script

Basic usage of the command line script would look something like this:

    > python3 symlinkwalk.py --resolve=path foo
    d /full/path/to/foo

The `--resolve` (or `-r`) option lets you set the resolving mode to one of:

* `path`
  * prints the absolute path to `foo` with any symlinks resolved
* `list`
  * prints a listing of the `foo` directory, with one path per line
  * all member paths will be absolute and fully resolved
* `tree` (the default)
  * prints the entire directory tree rooted at `foo`
  * follows a depth-first traversal order

### Output Format

Each line printed to the standard output consists of a code, a single space,
and an absolute path. This code may be one of:

* `d`: path is to an existing directory
* `f`: path is to an existing non-directory
* `m`: path is to a missing object
* `b`: path is to a broken symlink
* `r`: path is to a recursive symlink
* `x`: path was excluded by an `--exclude` pattern
* `u#`: the same unique path was encountered `#` times, where `#` ≥ 2
  * this only appears in conjunction with the `--unique-paths` option

`d` and `f` lines are printed as the item is encountered, while the rest of the
codes are gathered during execution and printed at the end. While an `f` path
would most likely be to a regular file (hence the 'f'), it could potentially be
something more exotic, such as a device or fifo.

An `m` path, while missing at some level, is a path you ought to be able to
complete as say a directory using `mkdir -p /path/to/missing/foo`.

The same cannot be said for `b` or `r` paths. In `--resolve=path` mode, if a
broken/recursive symlink is encountered anywhere along the path you supply, the
printed path will be an absolute path to the symlink itself with anything
beyond it discarded. For example, say your path was `foo/bar/baz`, of which
`foo` turned out to be a broken symlink. The output would be something like `b
/path/to/broken/foo`. This is the path of concern you need to address, and the
`bar/baz` part becomes superfluous at this point.

Regarding `r` paths, symlink recursion is only detected after the symlink is
followed once. If the path walk eventually circles back to the same symlink,
it will be flagged as recursive with the `r` code. If there are several
symlinks forming a loop, only one of them may get flagged, but that should be
enough to stop the infinite recursion. The point, though, is that you should be
aware that the algorithm may not exhaustively identify *all* recursive
symlinks.

### Command Line

    path/to/symlinkwalk.py [-h] [-r MODE] [-x PATTERN] [-u] [TARGET ...]

* `TARGET`
  * zero or more target paths
  * these may be either absolute or relative to the current working directory
  * defaults to the current working directory is no targets supplied
* `-r MODE` or `--resolve=MODE`
  * `MODE` = one of `path`, `list`, or `tree` as described earlier
  * defaults to `tree`
* `-x PATTERN` or `--exclude=PATTERN`
  * `PATTERN` = a glob pattern that can be used to exclude certain paths
  * you may specify multiple `-x` arguments
* `-u` or `--unique-paths`
  * normally, the same path may appear multiple times in a listing
  * this may happen if you provide multiple targets that overlap
  * it may also happen if multiple symlinks direct to the same location
  * `-u` should prevent such paths appearing in `f` or `d` lines more than once
  * you can still screen for `u#` lines to see which would have done so

## Python Package Interface

*Note: The documentation in this section is structured like a tutorial.
If you are looking for an API reference, consult `pydoc` instead.*

The `safe_follow_symlinks` package is built around 2 central classes, each
defined within its own module:

* `symlinkwalk.SymlinkWalk`
* `support.pathref.PathRef`

`SymLinkWalk` implements the core functionality, but uses `PathRef` exclusively
when working with paths.

### `class PathRef`

This class unifies a number of common types used to represent paths by the
Python Standard Library.

Its sole `ref` attribute can be any of the following
[path-like](https://docs.python.org/3/glossary.html#term-path-like-object)
types:

* `str`
* `bytes`
* `pathlib.PurePath` (and all of its subclasses including `pathlib.Path`)
* `os.DirEntry` (the type generated by iterating `os.scandir()`)

`PathRef` itself is a path-like type. It includes 2 useful properties:

* `path` (`pathlib.Path`, read-only)
  * the `ref` attribute in `Path` form
* `path_or_entry` (`pathlib.Path` or `os.DirEntry`, read-only)
  * this can be useful since those two classes have a lot of APIs in common

The built-in `exists()` method works much like `pathlib.Path.exists()`.
You can call it on any `PathRef`.

For those generated by `SymlinkWalk`, you may also call:

* `is_broken_link()`: path is a symlink pointing to nothing that exists?
  * `exists()` will return `False` in this case
  * this is in keeping with `Path.exists()` behaviour
* `is_recursive_link()`: path is a symlink flagged as recursive?
  * note that a `False` return value does not imply it is *not* recursive
  * the `SymlinkWalk` algorithm may not have detected the recursion
* `is_bad_link()`: path is a broken or recursive symlink
  * this simply combines the above 2 calls
* `is_bad_path()`: path does not exist or is a bad link

### `class SymlinkWalk`

As mentioned earlier, this class implements the core functionality. Its public
attributes can be divided into those you can optionally supply through its
`__init__()` method as input and those generated as output when you call one of
its primary methods.

The input args include:

* `path_filter` (callback): accepts/rejects paths being iterated
* `yield_unique` (`bool`): never yield the same path twice?
  * multiple symlinks can sometimes point to the same place

These args influence the iterating algorithms implemented by `iter_dir()` and
`iter_tree()`. Suppose you only wanted to list zip files? You could write a
path filter like this:

    def zip_file_filter(pr: PathRef) -> bool:
        return pr.path.suffix == '.zip'

When instantiating a `SymlinkWalk`, you can optionally treat it as a context
manager.

    with Symlinkwalk(path_filter=zip_file_filter) as slw:
        for pr in slw.iter_tree('foo'):
            print(str(pr))

`SymlinkWalk` generates a lot of state, so this ensures that it gets released
when you are done with it (or at least flagged for release by the garbage
collector).

### `SymlinkWalk Methods`

There are 3 primary methods you can call to resolve paths.

#### `resolve_path(pathRef, expand_user=True, strict=False)`

This is actually a class method, so you need not instantiate a `SymlinkWalk` to
call it. (It does so internally.)

You give it a `PathRef` and it returns another `PathRef` containing an absolute
version of your input with all symlinks resolved where possible.

    pr = SymlinkWalk.resolve_path(PathRef('foo'))
    if pr.is_bad_path():
        print(f'there is a problem with the path:', pr)

It is a good idea to call some of those `PathRec` methods on the result to make
sure nothing went wrong during path resolution. Alternatively, you can use the
`strict=True` option to have it raise an exception in that case.

#### `iter_dir(dirPathRef, resolved=False, expand_user=True)`

This is a generator that yields all paths in a directory in fully-resolved
form, provided:

1. The path is not rejected by your custom `path_filter`.
2. The path can, if fact, be properly resolved to an existing object.
3. If attribute `yield_unique=True` and the path has already been yielded.

Failing any of these, the output `skipped`, `bad_paths`, and `path_hits`
attributes will be updated with the rejected paths, respectively.

Let's say you wanted to implement your own recursive directory tree-walking
using `iter_dir()`. It might look something like this:

    def print_dir(dirPathRef, symLinkWalk, resolved=False):
        print(dirPathRef)
        for pr in symLinkWalk.iter_dir(dirPathRef, resolved):
            if pr.path_or_entry.is_dir():
                print_dir(pr, symLinkWalk, resolved=True)
            else:
                print(pr)

    print_dir(PathRef('foo'))

`iter_dir()`'s `resolved` argument defaults to `False`, meaning that what you
are passing in as your `PathRef` needs to be resolved before the iteration can
commence. That makes sense the first time you call your `print_dir()` function,
but in recursive calls, anything that is coming out of `iter_dir()` should
already be resolved. There is no need to do so again.

(Note that when `resolved=True`, `expand_user` is ignored.)

#### `iter_tree(dirPathRef, resolved=False, expand_user=True)`

This works much like `iter_dir()` except it walks through the whole directory
tree for you. You could reduce the earlier example to this:

    for pr in symLinkWalk.iter_tree(PathRef('foo')):
        print(pr)
